(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2021 1
Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus
DOBBS, STATE HEALTH OFFICER OF THE
MISSISSIPPI DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, ET AL. v.
JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 19–1392. Argued December 1, 2021—Decided June 24, 2022
Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act provides that “[e]xcept in a medical
emergency or in the case of a severe fetal abnormality, a person shall
not intentionally or knowingly perform . . . or induce an abortion of an
unborn human being if the probable gestational age of the unborn human being has been determined to be greater than fifteen (15) weeks.”
Miss. Code Ann. §41–41–191. Respondents—Jackson Women’s Health
Organization, an abortion clinic, and one of its doctors—challenged the
Act in Federal District Court, alleging that it violated this Court’s precedents establishing a constitutional right to abortion, in particular Roe
v. Wade, 410 U. S. 113, and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa.
v. Casey, 505 U. S. 833. The District Court granted summary judgment in favor of respondents and permanently enjoined enforcement
of the Act, reasoning that Mississippi’s 15-week restriction on abortion
violates this Court’s cases forbidding States to ban abortion pre-viability. The Fifth Circuit affirmed. Before this Court, petitioners defend
the Act on the grounds that Roe and Casey were wrongly decided and
that the Act is constitutional because it satisfies rational-basis review.
Held: The Constitution does not confer a right to abortion; Roe and Casey
are overruled; and the authority to regulate abortion is returned to the
people and their elected representatives. Pp. 8–79.
(a) The critical question is whether the Constitution, properly understood, confers a right to obtain an abortion. Casey’s controlling
opinion skipped over that question and reaffirmed Roe solely on the
basis of stare decisis. A proper application of stare decisis, however,
requires an assessment of the strength of the grounds on which Roe





2 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Syllabus
was based. The Court therefore turns to the question that the Casey
plurality did not consider. Pp. 8–32.
(1) First, the Court reviews the standard that the Court’s cases
have used to determine whether the Fourteenth Amendment’s reference to “liberty” protects a particular right. The Constitution makes
no express reference to a right to obtain an abortion, but several constitutional provisions have been offered as potential homes for an implicit constitutional right. Roe held that the abortion right is part of a
right to privacy that springs from the First, Fourth, Fifth, Ninth, and
Fourteenth Amendments. See 410 U. S., at 152–153. The Casey Court
grounded its decision solely on the theory that the right to obtain an
abortion is part of the “liberty” protected by the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause. Others have suggested that support can
be found in the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause, but
that theory is squarely foreclosed by the Court’s precedents, which establish that a State’s regulation of abortion is not a sex-based classification and is thus not subject to the heightened scrutiny that applies
to such classifications. See Geduldig v. Aiello, 417 U. S. 484, 496,
n. 20; Bray v. Alexandria Women’s Health Clinic, 506 U. S. 263, 273–
274. Rather, regulations and prohibitions of abortion are governed by
the same standard of review as other health and safety measures.
Pp. 9–11.
(2) Next, the Court examines whether the right to obtain an abortion is rooted in the Nation’s history and tradition and whether it is an
essential component of “ordered liberty.” The Court finds that the
right to abortion is not deeply rooted in the Nation’s history and tradition. The underlying theory on which Casey rested—that the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause provides substantive, as well
as procedural, protection for “liberty”—has long been controversial.
The Court’s decisions have held that the Due Process Clause protects two categories of substantive rights—those rights guaranteed by
the first eight Amendments to the Constitution and those rights
deemed fundamental that are not mentioned anywhere in the Constitution. In deciding whether a right falls into either of these categories,
the question is whether the right is “deeply rooted in [our] history and
tradition” and whether it is essential to this Nation’s “scheme of ordered liberty.” Timbs v. Indiana, 586 U. S. ___, ___ (internal quotation
marks omitted). The term “liberty” alone provides little guidance.
Thus, historical inquiries are essential whenever the Court is asked to
recognize a new component of the “liberty” interest protected by the
Due Process Clause. In interpreting what is meant by “liberty,” the
Court must guard against the natural human tendency to confuse
what the Fourteenth Amendment protects with the Court’s own ardent
views about the liberty that Americans should enjoy. For this reason,





Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 3
Syllabus
the Court has been “reluctant” to recognize rights that are not mentioned in the Constitution. Collins v. Harker Heights, 503 U. S. 115, 125.
Guided by the history and tradition that map the essential components of the Nation’s concept of ordered liberty, the Court finds the
Fourteenth Amendment clearly does not protect the right to an abortion. Until the latter part of the 20th century, there was no support in
American law for a constitutional right to obtain an abortion. No state
constitutional provision had recognized such a right. Until a few years
before Roe, no federal or state court had recognized such a right. Nor
had any scholarly treatise. Indeed, abortion had long been a crime in
every single State. At common law, abortion was criminal in at least
some stages of pregnancy and was regarded as unlawful and could
have very serious consequences at all stages. American law followed
the common law until a wave of statutory restrictions in the 1800s expanded criminal liability for abortions. By the time the Fourteenth
Amendment was adopted, three-quarters of the States had made abortion a crime at any stage of pregnancy. This consensus endured until
the day Roe was decided. Roe either ignored or misstated this history,
and Casey declined to reconsider Roe’s faulty historical analysis.
Respondents’ argument that this history does not matter flies in the
face of the standard the Court has applied in determining whether an
asserted right that is nowhere mentioned in the Constitution is nevertheless protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. The Solicitor General repeats Roe’s claim that it is “doubtful . . . abortion was ever firmly
established as a common-law crime even with respect to the destruction of a quick fetus,” 410 U. S., at 136, but the great common-law authorities—Bracton, Coke, Hale, and Blackstone—all wrote that a postquickening abortion was a crime. Moreover, many authorities asserted that even a pre-quickening abortion was “unlawful” and that,
as a result, an abortionist was guilty of murder if the woman died from
the attempt. The Solicitor General suggests that history supports an
abortion right because of the common law’s failure to criminalize abortion before quickening, but the insistence on quickening was not universal, see Mills v. Commonwealth, 13 Pa. 631, 633; State v. Slagle, 83
N. C. 630, 632, and regardless, the fact that many States in the late
18th and early 19th century did not criminalize pre-quickening abortions does not mean that anyone thought the States lacked the authority to do so.
Instead of seriously pressing the argument that the abortion right
itself has deep roots, supporters of Roe and Casey contend that the
abortion right is an integral part of a broader entrenched right. Roe
termed this a right to privacy, 410 U. S., at 154, and Casey described
it as the freedom to make “intimate and personal choices” that are
“central to personal dignity and autonomy,” 505 U. S., at 851. Ordered




4 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Syllabus
liberty sets limits and defines the boundary between competing interests. Roe and Casey each struck a particular balance between the interests of a woman who wants an abortion and the interests of what
they termed “potential life.” Roe, 410 U. S., at 150; Casey, 505 U. S.,
at 852. But the people of the various States may evaluate those interests differently. The Nation’s historical understanding of ordered liberty does not prevent the people’s elected representatives from deciding how abortion should be regulated. Pp. 11–30.
(3) Finally, the Court considers whether a right to obtain an abortion is part of a broader entrenched right that is supported by other
precedents. The Court concludes the right to obtain an abortion cannot
be justified as a component of such a right. Attempts to justify abortion through appeals to a broader right to autonomy and to define one’s
“concept of existence” prove too much. Casey, 505 U. S., at 851. Those
criteria, at a high level of generality, could license fundamental rights
to illicit drug use, prostitution, and the like. What sharply distinguishes the abortion right from the rights recognized in the cases on
which Roe and Casey rely is something that both those decisions
acknowledged: Abortion is different because it destroys what Roe
termed “potential life” and what the law challenged in this case calls
an “unborn human being.” None of the other decisions cited by Roe
and Casey involved the critical moral question posed by abortion. Accordingly, those cases do not support the right to obtain an abortion,
and the Court’s conclusion that the Constitution does not confer such
a right does not undermine them in any way. Pp. 30–32.
(b) The doctrine of stare decisis does not counsel continued acceptance of Roe and Casey. Stare decisis plays an important role and
protects the interests of those who have taken action in reliance on a
past decision. It “reduces incentives for challenging settled precedents, saving parties and courts the expense of endless relitigation.”
Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC, 576 U. S. 446, 455. It “contributes to the actual and perceived integrity of the judicial process.”
Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U. S. 808, 827. And it restrains judicial hubris
by respecting the judgment of those who grappled with important
questions in the past. But stare decisis is not an inexorable command,
Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U. S. 223, 233, and “is at its weakest when
[the Court] interpret[s] the Constitution,” Agostini v. Felton, 521 U. S.
203, 235. Some of the Court’s most important constitutional decisions
have overruled prior precedents. See, e.g., Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U. S. 483, 491 (overruling the infamous decision in Plessy v.
Ferguson, 163 U. S. 537, and its progeny).
The Court’s cases have identified factors that should be considered
in deciding when a precedent should be overruled. Janus v. State,
County, and Municipal Employees, 585 U. S. ___, ___–___. Five factors

Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 5
Syllabus
discussed below weigh strongly in favor of overruling Roe and Casey.
Pp. 39–66.
(1) The nature of the Court’s error. Like the infamous decision in
Plessy v. Ferguson, Roe was also egregiously wrong and on a collision
course with the Constitution from the day it was decided. Casey perpetuated its errors, calling both sides of the national controversy to
resolve their debate, but in doing so, Casey necessarily declared a winning side. Those on the losing side—those who sought to advance the
State’s interest in fetal life—could no longer seek to persuade their
elected representatives to adopt policies consistent with their views.
The Court short-circuited the democratic process by closing it to the
large number of Americans who disagreed with Roe. Pp. 43–45.
(2) The quality of the reasoning. Without any grounding in the
constitutional text, history, or precedent, Roe imposed on the entire
country a detailed set of rules for pregnancy divided into trimesters
much like those that one might expect to find in a statute or regulation.
See 410 U. S., at 163–164. Roe’s failure even to note the overwhelming
consensus of state laws in effect in 1868 is striking, and what it said
about the common law was simply wrong. Then, after surveying history, the opinion spent many paragraphs conducting the sort of factfinding that might be undertaken by a legislative committee, and did
not explain why the sources on which it relied shed light on the meaning of the Constitution. As to precedent, citing a broad array of cases,
the Court found support for a constitutional “right of personal privacy.”
Id., at 152. But Roe conflated the right to shield information from disclosure and the right to make and implement important personal decisions without governmental interference. See Whalen v. Roe, 429
U. S. 589, 599–600. None of these decisions involved what is distinctive about abortion: its effect on what Roe termed “potential life.”
When the Court summarized the basis for the scheme it imposed on
the country, it asserted that its rules were “consistent with,” among
other things, “the relative weights of the respective interests involved”
and “the demands of the profound problems of the present day.” Roe,
410 U. S., at 165. These are precisely the sort of considerations that
legislative bodies often take into account when they draw lines that
accommodate competing interests. The scheme Roe produced looked
like legislation, and the Court provided the sort of explanation that
might be expected from a legislative body. An even more glaring deficiency was Roe’s failure to justify the critical distinction it drew between pre- and post-viability abortions. See id., at 163. The arbitrary
viability line, which Casey termed Roe’s central rule, has not found
much support among philosophers and ethicists who have attempted
to justify a right to abortion. The most obvious problem with any such





6 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Syllabus
argument is that viability has changed over time and is heavily dependent on factors—such as medical advances and the availability of
quality medical care—that have nothing to do with the characteristics
of a fetus.
When Casey revisited Roe almost 20 years later, it reaffirmed Roe’s
central holding, but pointedly refrained from endorsing most of its reasoning. The Court abandoned any reliance on a privacy right and instead grounded the abortion right entirely on the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause. 505 U. S., at 846. The controlling opinion
criticized and rejected Roe’s trimester scheme, 505 U. S., at 872, and
substituted a new and obscure “undue burden” test. Casey, in short,
either refused to reaffirm or rejected important aspects of Roe’s analysis, failed to remedy glaring deficiencies in Roe’s reasoning, endorsed
what it termed Roe’s central holding while suggesting that a majority
might not have thought it was correct, provided no new support for the
abortion right other than Roe’s status as precedent, and imposed a new
test with no firm grounding in constitutional text, history, or precedent. Pp. 45–56.
(3) Workability. Deciding whether a precedent should be overruled depends in part on whether the rule it imposes is workable—that
is, whether it can be understood and applied in a consistent and predictable manner. Casey’s “undue burden” test has scored poorly on the
workability scale. The Casey plurality tried to put meaning into the
“undue burden” test by setting out three subsidiary rules, but these
rules created their own problems. And the difficulty of applying Casey’s new rules surfaced in that very case. Compare 505 U. S., at 881–
887, with id., at 920–922 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). The experience of the Courts of Appeals provides further
evidence that Casey’s “line between” permissible and unconstitutional
restrictions “has proved to be impossible to draw with precision.” Janus, 585 U. S., at ___. Casey has generated a long list of Circuit conflicts. Continued adherence to Casey’s unworkable “undue burden”
test would undermine, not advance, the “evenhanded, predictable, and
consistent development of legal principles.” Payne, 501 U. S., at 827.
Pp. 56–62.
(4) Effect on other areas of law. Roe and Casey have led to the
distortion of many important but unrelated legal doctrines, and that
effect provides further support for overruling those decisions. See Ramos v. Louisiana, 590 U. S. ___, ___ (KAVANAUGH, J., concurring in
part). Pp. 62–63.
(5) Reliance interests. Overruling Roe and Casey will not upend
concrete reliance interests like those that develop in “cases involving
property and contract rights.” Payne, 501 U. S., at 828. In Casey, the
controlling opinion conceded that traditional reliance interests were






Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 7
Syllabus
not implicated because getting an abortion is generally “unplanned activity,” and “reproductive planning could take virtually immediate account of any sudden restoration of state authority to ban abortions.”
505 U. S., at 856. Instead, the opinion perceived a more intangible
form of reliance, namely, that “people [had] organized intimate relationships and made choices that define their views of themselves and
their places in society . . . in reliance on the availability of abortion in
the event that contraception should fail” and that “[t]he ability of
women to participate equally in the economic and social life of the Nation has been facilitated by their ability to control their reproductive
lives.” Ibid. The contending sides in this case make impassioned and
conflicting arguments about the effects of the abortion right on the
lives of women as well as the status of the fetus. The Casey plurality’s
speculative attempt to weigh the relative importance of the interests
of the fetus and the mother represent a departure from the “original
constitutional proposition” that “courts do not substitute their social
and economic beliefs for the judgment of legislative bodies.” Ferguson
v. Skrupa, 372 U. S. 726, 729–730.
The Solicitor General suggests that overruling Roe and Casey would
threaten the protection of other rights under the Due Process Clause.
The Court emphasizes that this decision concerns the constitutional
right to abortion and no other right. Nothing in this opinion should be
understood to cast doubt on precedents that do not concern abortion.
Pp. 63–66.
(c) Casey identified another concern, namely, the danger that the
public will perceive a decision overruling a controversial “watershed”
decision, such as Roe, as influenced by political considerations or public opinion. 505 U. S., at 866–867. But the Court cannot allow its decisions to be affected by such extraneous concerns. A precedent of this
Court is subject to the usual principles of stare decisis under which
adherence to precedent is the norm but not an inexorable command. If
the rule were otherwise, erroneous decisions like Plessy would still be
the law. The Court’s job is to interpret the law, apply longstanding
principles of stare decisis, and decide this case accordingly. Pp. 66–69.
(d) Under the Court’s precedents, rational-basis review is the appropriate standard to apply when state abortion regulations undergo constitutional challenge. Given that procuring an abortion is not a fundamental constitutional right, it follows that the States may regulate
abortion for legitimate reasons, and when such regulations are challenged under the Constitution, courts cannot “substitute their social
and economic beliefs for the judgment of legislative bodies.” Ferguson,
372 U. S., at 729–730. That applies even when the laws at issue concern matters of great social significance and moral substance. A law
regulating abortion, like other health and welfare laws, is entitled to a



8 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Syllabus
“strong presumption of validity.” Heller v. Doe, 509 U. S. 312, 319. It
must be sustained if there is a rational basis on which the legislature
could have thought that it would serve legitimate state interests. Id.,
at 320.
Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act is supported by the Mississippi
Legislature’s specific findings, which include the State’s asserted interest in “protecting the life of the unborn.” §2(b)(i). These legitimate
interests provide a rational basis for the Gestational Age Act, and it
follows that respondents’ constitutional challenge must fail. Pp. 76–
78.
(e) Abortion presents a profound moral question. The Constitution
does not prohibit the citizens of each State from regulating or prohibiting abortion. Roe and Casey arrogated that authority. The Court
overrules those decisions and returns that authority to the people and
their elected representatives. Pp. 78–79.
945 F. 3d 265, reversed and remanded.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which THOMAS, GORSUCH, KAVANAUGH, and BARRETT, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J., and KAVANAUGH, J., filed concurring opinions. ROBERTS, C. J., filed an opinion
concurring in the judgment. BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., filed
a dissenting opinion.




_________________
_________________
Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 1
Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order that
corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
No. 19–1392
THOMAS E. DOBBS, STATE HEALTH OFFICER OF
THE MISSISSIPPI DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
ET AL., PETITIONERS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
[June 24, 2022]
JUSTICE ALITO delivered the opinion of the Court.
Abortion presents a profound moral issue on which Americans hold sharply conflicting views. Some believe fervently
that a human person comes into being at conception and
that abortion ends an innocent life. Others feel just as
strongly that any regulation of abortion invades a woman’s
right to control her own body and prevents women from
achieving full equality. Still others in a third group think
that abortion should be allowed under some but not all circumstances, and those within this group hold a variety of
views about the particular restrictions that should be imposed.
For the first 185 years after the adoption of the Constitution, each State was permitted to address this issue in accordance with the views of its citizens. Then, in 1973, this
Court decided Roe v. Wade, 410 U. S. 113. Even though the
Constitution makes no mention of abortion, the Court held
that it confers a broad right to obtain one. It did not claim
that American law or the common law had ever recognized


2 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Opinion of the Court
such a right, and its survey of history ranged from the constitutionally irrelevant (e.g., its discussion of abortion in antiquity) to the plainly incorrect (e.g., its assertion that abortion was probably never a crime under the common law).
After cataloging a wealth of other information having no
bearing on the meaning of the Constitution, the opinion
concluded with a numbered set of rules much like those that
might be found in a statute enacted by a legislature.
Under this scheme, each trimester of pregnancy was regulated differently, but the most critical line was drawn at
roughly the end of the second trimester, which, at the time,
corresponded to the point at which a fetus was thought to
achieve “viability,” i.e., the ability to survive outside the
womb. Although the Court acknowledged that States had
a legitimate interest in protecting “potential life,”1 it found
that this interest could not justify any restriction on previability abortions. The Court did not explain the basis for
this line, and even abortion supporters have found it hard
to defend Roe’s reasoning. One prominent constitutional
scholar wrote that he “would vote for a statute very much
like the one the Court end[ed] up drafting” if he were “a
legislator,” but his assessment of Roe was memorable and
brutal: Roe was “not constitutional law” at all and gave “almost no sense of an obligation to try to be.”2
At the time of Roe, 30 States still prohibited abortion at
all stages. In the years prior to that decision, about a third
of the States had liberalized their laws, but Roe abruptly
ended that political process. It imposed the same highly
restrictive regime on the entire Nation, and it effectively
struck down the abortion laws of every single State.3 As
—————— 1 Roe v. Wade, 410 U. S. 113, 163 (1973). 2 J. Ely, The Wages of Crying Wolf: A Comment on Roe v. Wade, 82
Yale L. J. 920, 926, 947 (1973) (Ely) (emphasis deleted). 3L. Tribe, Foreword: Toward a Model of Roles in the Due Process of
Life and Law, 87 Harv. L. Rev. 1, 2 (1973) (Tribe).
Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 3
Opinion of the Court
Justice Byron White aptly put it in his dissent, the decision
represented the “exercise of raw judicial power,” 410 U. S.,
at 222, and it sparked a national controversy that has embittered our political culture for a half century.4
 Eventually, in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v.
Casey, 505 U. S. 833 (1992), the Court revisited Roe, but the
Members of the Court split three ways. Two Justices expressed no desire to change Roe in any way.5 Four others
wanted to overrule the decision in its entirety.6 And the
three remaining Justices, who jointly signed the controlling
opinion, took a third position.7 Their opinion did not endorse Roe’s reasoning, and it even hinted that one or more
of its authors might have “reservations” about whether the
Constitution protects a right to abortion.8 But the opinion
concluded that stare decisis, which calls for prior decisions
to be followed in most instances, required adherence to
what it called Roe’s “central holding”—that a State may not
constitutionally protect fetal life before “viability”—even if
that holding was wrong.9 Anything less, the opinion
claimed, would undermine respect for this Court and the
rule of law.
Paradoxically, the judgment in Casey did a fair amount
of overruling. Several important abortion decisions were
—————— 4See R. Ginsburg, Speaking in a Judicial Voice, 67 N. Y. U. L. Rev.
1185, 1208 (1992) (“Roe . . . halted a political process that was moving in
a reform direction and thereby, I believed, prolonged divisiveness and
deferred stable settlement of the issue”). 5See 505 U. S., at 911 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting
in part); id., at 922 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part, concurring in judgment in part, and dissenting in part). 6See id., at 944 (Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part); id., at 979 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment in part
and dissenting in part). 7See id., at 843 (joint opinion of O’Connor, Kennedy, and Souter, JJ.). 8 Id., at 853. 9 Id., at 860.



4 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Opinion of the Court
overruled in toto, and Roe itself was overruled in part.10 Casey threw out Roe’s trimester scheme and substituted a new
rule of uncertain origin under which States were forbidden
to adopt any regulation that imposed an “undue burden” on
a woman’s right to have an abortion.11 The decision provided no clear guidance about the difference between a
“due” and an “undue” burden. But the three Justices who
authored the controlling opinion “call[ed] the contending
sides of a national controversy to end their national division” by treating the Court’s decision as the final settlement
of the question of the constitutional right to abortion.12
As has become increasingly apparent in the intervening
years, Casey did not achieve that goal. Americans continue
to hold passionate and widely divergent views on abortion,
and state legislatures have acted accordingly. Some have
recently enacted laws allowing abortion, with few restrictions, at all stages of pregnancy. Others have tightly
restricted abortion beginning well before viability. And in
this case, 26 States have expressly asked this Court to overrule Roe and Casey and allow the States to regulate or prohibit pre-viability abortions.
Before us now is one such state law. The State of Mississippi asks us to uphold the constitutionality of a law that
generally prohibits an abortion after the 15th week of pregnancy—several weeks before the point at which a fetus is
now regarded as “viable” outside the womb. In defending
this law, the State’s primary argument is that we should
reconsider and overrule Roe and Casey and once again allow
each State to regulate abortion as its citizens wish. On the
other side, respondents and the Solicitor General ask us to
—————— 10 Id., at 861, 870, 873 (overruling Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, Inc., 462 U. S. 416 (1983), and Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 476 U. S. 747 (1986)). 11 505 U. S., at 874.
12 Id., at 867.



Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 5
Opinion of the Court
reaffirm Roe and Casey, and they contend that the Mississippi law cannot stand if we do so. Allowing Mississippi to
prohibit abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy, they argue,
“would be no different than overruling Casey and Roe entirely.” Brief for Respondents 43. They contend that “no
half-measures” are available and that we must either reaffirm or overrule Roe and Casey. Brief for Respondents 50.
We hold that Roe and Casey must be overruled. The Constitution makes no reference to abortion, and no such right
is implicitly protected by any constitutional provision, including the one on which the defenders of Roe and Casey
now chiefly rely—the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. That provision has been held to guarantee
some rights that are not mentioned in the Constitution, but
any such right must be “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition” and “implicit in the concept of ordered
liberty.” Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U. S. 702, 721
(1997) (internal quotation marks omitted).
The right to abortion does not fall within this category.
Until the latter part of the 20th century, such a right was
entirely unknown in American law. Indeed, when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, three quarters of the
States made abortion a crime at all stages of pregnancy.
The abortion right is also critically different from any other
right that this Court has held to fall within the Fourteenth
Amendment’s protection of “liberty.” Roe’s defenders characterize the abortion right as similar to the rights recognized in past decisions involving matters such as intimate
sexual relations, contraception, and marriage, but abortion
is fundamentally different, as both Roe and Casey acknowledged, because it destroys what those decisions called “fetal
life” and what the law now before us describes as an “unborn human being.”13
 Stare decisis, the doctrine on which Casey’s controlling
—————— 13Miss. Code Ann. §41–41–191(4)(b) (2018).


6 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Opinion of the Court
opinion was based, does not compel unending adherence to
Roe’s abuse of judicial authority. Roe was egregiously
wrong from the start. Its reasoning was exceptionally
weak, and the decision has had damaging consequences.
And far from bringing about a national settlement of the
abortion issue, Roe and Casey have enflamed debate and
deepened division.
It is time to heed the Constitution and return the issue of
abortion to the people’s elected representatives. “The permissibility of abortion, and the limitations, upon it, are to
be resolved like most important questions in our democracy: by citizens trying to persuade one another and then
voting.” Casey, 505 U. S., at 979 (Scalia, J., concurring in
judgment in part and dissenting in part). That is what the
Constitution and the rule of law demand.
I
The law at issue in this case, Mississippi’s Gestational
Age Act, see Miss. Code Ann. §41–41–191 (2018), contains
this central provision: “Except in a medical emergency or in
the case of a severe fetal abnormality, a person shall not
intentionally or knowingly perform . . . or induce an abortion of an unborn human being if the probable gestational
age of the unborn human being has been determined to be
greater than fifteen (15) weeks.” §4(b).14
To support this Act, the legislature made a series of factual findings. It began by noting that, at the time of enactment, only six countries besides the United States “permit[ted] nontherapeutic or elective abortion-on-demand
after the twentieth week of gestation.”15 §2(a). The legisla-
—————— 14The Act defines “gestational age” to be “the age of an unborn human
being as calculated from the first day of the last menstrual period of the
pregnant woman.” §3(f ). 15Those other six countries were Canada, China, the Netherlands,


Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 7
Opinion of the Court
ture then found that at 5 or 6 weeks’ gestational age an “unborn human being’s heart begins beating”; at 8 weeks the
“unborn human being begins to move about in the womb”;
at 9 weeks “all basic physiological functions are present”; at
10 weeks “vital organs begin to function,” and “[h]air, fingernails, and toenails . . . begin to form”; at 11 weeks “an
unborn human being’s diaphragm is developing,” and he or
she may “move about freely in the womb”; and at 12 weeks
the “unborn human being” has “taken on ‘the human form’
in all relevant respects.” §2(b)(i) (quoting Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U. S. 124, 160 (2007)). It found that most abortions after 15 weeks employ “dilation and evacuation procedures which involve the use of surgical instruments to
crush and tear the unborn child,” and it concluded that the
“intentional commitment of such acts for nontherapeutic or
elective reasons is a barbaric practice, dangerous for the
maternal patient, and demeaning to the medical profession.” §2(b)(i)(8).
Respondents are an abortion clinic, Jackson Women’s
Health Organization, and one of its doctors. On the day the
Gestational Age Act was enacted, respondents filed suit in
Federal District Court against various Mississippi officials,
alleging that the Act violated this Court’s precedents establishing a constitutional right to abortion. The District
——————
North Korea, Singapore, and Vietnam. See A. Baglini, Charlotte Lozier
Institute, Gestational Limits on Abortion in the United States Compared
to International Norms 6–7 (2014); M. Lee, Is the United States One of
Seven Countries That “Allow Elective Abortions After 20 Weeks of Pregnancy?” Wash. Post (Oct. 8, 2017), www.washingtonpost.com/news/factchecker/wp/2017/10/09/is-the-united-states-one-of-seven-countries-thatallow-elective-abortions-after-20-weeks-of-preganacy (stating that the
claim made by the Mississippi Legislature and the Charlotte Lozier Institute was “backed by data”). A more recent compilation from the Center for Reproductive Rights indicates that Iceland and Guinea-Bissau are
now also similarly permissive. See The World’s Abortion Laws, Center
for Reproductive Rights (Feb. 23, 2021), https://reproductiverights.org/
maps/worlds-abortion-laws/.

8 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Opinion of the Court
Court granted summary judgment in favor of respondents
and permanently enjoined enforcement of the Act, reasoning that “viability marks the earliest point at which the
State’s interest in fetal life is constitutionally adequate to
justify a legislative ban on nontherapeutic abortions” and
that 15 weeks’ gestational age is “prior to viability.” Jackson Women’s Health Org. v. Currier, 349 F. Supp. 3d 536,
539–540 (SD Miss. 2019) (internal quotation marks omitted). The Fifth Circuit affirmed. 945 F. 3d 265 (2019).
We granted certiorari, 593 U. S. ___ (2021), to resolve the
question whether “all pre-viability prohibitions on elective
abortions are unconstitutional,” Pet. for Cert. i. Petitioners’ primary defense of the Mississippi Gestational Age Act
is that Roe and Casey were wrongly decided and that “the
Act is constitutional because it satisfies rational-basis review.” Brief for Petitioners 49. Respondents answer that
allowing Mississippi to ban pre-viability abortions “would
be no different than overruling Casey and Roe entirely.”
Brief for Respondents 43. They tell us that “no halfmeasures” are available: We must either reaffirm or overrule Roe and Casey. Brief for Respondents 50.
II
We begin by considering the critical question whether the
Constitution, properly understood, confers a right to obtain
an abortion. Skipping over that question, the controlling
opinion in Casey reaffirmed Roe’s “central holding” based
solely on the doctrine of stare decisis, but as we will explain,
proper application of stare decisis required an assessment
of the strength of the grounds on which Roe was based. See
infra, at 45–56.
We therefore turn to the question that the Casey plurality
did not consider, and we address that question in three
steps. First, we explain the standard that our cases have
used in determining whether the Fourteenth Amendment’s
reference to “liberty” protects a particular right. Second,
Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 9
Opinion of the Court
we examine whether the right at issue in this case is rooted
in our Nation’s history and tradition and whether it is an
essential component of what we have described as “ordered
liberty.” Finally, we consider whether a right to obtain an
abortion is part of a broader entrenched right that is supported by other precedents.
A
1
Constitutional analysis must begin with “the language of
the instrument,” Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. 1, 186–189
(1824), which offers a “fixed standard” for ascertaining
what our founding document means, 1 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States §399, p. 383
(1833). The Constitution makes no express reference to a
right to obtain an abortion, and therefore those who claim
that it protects such a right must show that the right is
somehow implicit in the constitutional text.
Roe, however, was remarkably loose in its treatment of
the constitutional text. It held that the abortion right,
which is not mentioned in the Constitution, is part of a right
to privacy, which is also not mentioned. See 410 U. S., at
152–153. And that privacy right, Roe observed, had been
found to spring from no fewer than five different constitutional provisions—the First, Fourth, Fifth, Ninth, and
Fourteenth Amendments. Id., at 152.
The Court’s discussion left open at least three ways in
which some combination of these provisions could protect
the abortion right. One possibility was that the right was
“founded . . . in the Ninth Amendment’s reservation of
rights to the people.” Id., at 153. Another was that the
right was rooted in the First, Fourth, or Fifth Amendment,
or in some combination of those provisions, and that this
right had been “incorporated” into the Due Process Clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment just as many other Bill of
Rights provisions had by then been incorporated. Ibid; see


10 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Opinion of the Court
also McDonald v. Chicago, 561 U. S. 742, 763–766 (2010)
(majority opinion) (discussing incorporation). And a third
path was that the First, Fourth, and Fifth Amendments
played no role and that the right was simply a component
of the “liberty” protected by the Fourteenth Amendment’s
Due Process Clause. Roe, 410 U. S., at 153. Roe expressed
the “feel[ing]” that the Fourteenth Amendment was the provision that did the work, but its message seemed to be that
the abortion right could be found somewhere in the Constitution and that specifying its exact location was not of paramount importance.16 The Casey Court did not defend this
unfocused analysis and instead grounded its decision solely
on the theory that the right to obtain an abortion is part of
the “liberty” protected by the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due
Process Clause.
We discuss this theory in depth below, but before doing
so, we briefly address one additional constitutional provision that some of respondents’ amici have now offered as
yet another potential home for the abortion right: the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause. See Brief for
United States as Amicus Curiae 24 (Brief for United
States); see also Brief for Equal Protection Constitutional
Law Scholars as Amici Curiae. Neither Roe nor Casey saw
fit to invoke this theory, and it is squarely foreclosed by our
precedents, which establish that a State’s regulation of
abortion is not a sex-based classification and is thus not
subject to the “heightened scrutiny” that applies to such
classifications.17 The regulation of a medical procedure that
—————— 16The Court’s words were as follows: “This right of privacy, whether it
be founded in the Fourteenth Amendment’s concept of personal liberty
and restrictions upon state action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court
determined, in the Ninth Amendment’s reservation of rights to the people, is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to
terminate her pregnancy.” 410 U. S., at 153. 17See, e.g., Sessions v. Morales-Santana, 582 U. S. 47, ___ (2017) (slip
op., at 8).
Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 11
Opinion of the Court
only one sex can undergo does not trigger heightened constitutional scrutiny unless the regulation is a “mere pretex[t] designed to effect an invidious discrimination against
members of one sex or the other.” Geduldig v. Aiello, 417
U. S. 484, 496, n. 20 (1974). And as the Court has stated,
the “goal of preventing abortion” does not constitute “invidiously discriminatory animus” against women. Bray v. Alexandria Women’s Health Clinic, 506 U. S. 263, 273–274
(1993) (internal quotation marks omitted). Accordingly,
laws regulating or prohibiting abortion are not subject to
heightened scrutiny. Rather, they are governed by the
same standard of review as other health and safety
measures.18
With this new theory addressed, we turn to Casey’s bold
assertion that the abortion right is an aspect of the “liberty”
protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. 505 U. S., at 846; Brief for Respondents 17;
Brief for United States 21–22.
2
The underlying theory on which this argument rests—
that the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause provides substantive, as well as procedural, protection for “liberty”—has long been controversial. But our decisions have
held that the Due Process Clause protects two categories of
substantive rights.
The first consists of rights guaranteed by the first eight
Amendments. Those Amendments originally applied only
to the Federal Government, Barron ex rel. Tiernan v. Mayor
of Baltimore, 7 Pet. 243, 247–251 (1833) (opinion for the
Court by Marshall, C. J.), but this Court has held that the
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment “incorporates” the great majority of those rights and thus makes
them equally applicable to the States. See McDonald, 561
—————— 18We discuss this standard in Part VI of this opinion.


12 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Opinion of the Court
U. S., at 763–767, and nn. 12–13. The second category—
which is the one in question here—comprises a select list of
fundamental rights that are not mentioned anywhere in the
Constitution.
In deciding whether a right falls into either of these categories, the Court has long asked whether the right is
“deeply rooted in [our] history and tradition” and whether
it is essential to our Nation’s “scheme of ordered liberty.”
Timbs v. Indiana, 586 U. S. ___, ___ (2019) (slip op., at 3)
(internal quotation marks omitted); McDonald, 561 U. S.,
at 764, 767 (internal quotation marks omitted); Glucksberg,
521 U. S., at 721 (internal quotation marks omitted).19 And
in conducting this inquiry, we have engaged in a careful
analysis of the history of the right at issue.
Justice Ginsburg’s opinion for the Court in Timbs is a recent example. In concluding that the Eighth Amendment’s
protection against excessive fines is “fundamental to our
scheme of ordered liberty” and “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,” 586 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7)
(internal quotation marks omitted), her opinion traced the
right back to Magna Carta, Blackstone’s Commentaries,
and 35 of the 37 state constitutions in effect at the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment. 586 U. S., at ___–___
(slip op., at 3–7).
A similar inquiry was undertaken in McDonald, which
held that the Fourteenth Amendment protects the right to
keep and bear arms. The lead opinion surveyed the origins
of the Second Amendment, the debates in Congress about
—————— 19See also, e.g., Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U. S. 145, 148 (1968) (asking
whether “a right is among those ‘fundamental principles of liberty and
justice which lie at the base of our civil and political institutions’ ”); Palko
v. Connecticut, 302 U. S. 319, 325 (1937) (requiring “a ‘principle of justice
so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as to be ranked
as fundamental’ ” (quoting Snyder v. Massachusetts, 291 U. S. 97, 105
(1934))).

Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 13
Opinion of the Court
the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, the state constitutions in effect when that Amendment was ratified (at
least 22 of the 37 States protected the right to keep and bear
arms), federal laws enacted during the same period, and
other relevant historical evidence. 561 U. S., at 767–777.
Only then did the opinion conclude that “the Framers and
ratifiers of the Fourteenth Amendment counted the right to
keep and bear arms among those fundamental rights necessary to our system of ordered liberty.” Id., at 778; see also
id., at 822–850 (THOMAS, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (surveying history and reaching the same
result under the Fourteenth Amendment’s Privileges or Immunities Clause).
Timbs and McDonald concerned the question whether
the Fourteenth Amendment protects rights that are expressly set out in the Bill of Rights, and it would be anomalous if similar historical support were not required when a
putative right is not mentioned anywhere in the Constitution. Thus, in Glucksberg, which held that the Due Process
Clause does not confer a right to assisted suicide, the Court
surveyed more than 700 years of “Anglo-American common
law tradition,” 521 U. S., at 711, and made clear that a fundamental right must be “objectively, deeply rooted in this
Nation’s history and tradition,” id., at 720–721.
Historical inquiries of this nature are essential whenever we are asked to recognize a new component of the “liberty” protected by the Due Process Clause because the term
“liberty” alone provides little guidance. “Liberty” is a capacious term. As Lincoln once said: “We all declare for Liberty; but in using the same word we do not all mean the
same thing.”20 In a well-known essay, Isaiah Berlin reported that “[h]istorians of ideas” had cataloged more than
—————— 20Address at Sanitary Fair at Baltimore, Md. (Apr. 18, 1864), reprinted
in 7 The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln 301 (R. Basler ed. 1953).



14 DOBBS v. JACKSON WOMEN’S HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Opinion of the Court
200 different senses in which the term had been used.21
In interpreting what is meant by the Fourteenth Amendment’s reference to “liberty,” we must guard against the
natural human tendency to confuse what that Amendment
protects with our own ardent views about the liberty that
Americans should enjoy. That is why the Court has long
been “reluctant” to recognize rights that are not mentioned
in the Constitution. Collins v. Harker Heights, 503 U. S.
115, 125 (1992). “Substantive due process has at times been
a treacherous field for this Court,” Moore v. East Cleveland,
431 U. S. 494, 503 (1977) (plurality opinion), and it has
sometimes led the Court to usurp authority that the Constitution entrusts to the people’s elected representatives.
See Regents of Univ. of Mich. v. Ewing, 474 U. S. 214, 225–
226 (1985). As the Court cautioned in Glucksberg, “[w]e
must . . . exercise the utmost care whenever we are asked
to break new ground in this field, lest the liberty protected
by the Due Process Clause be subtly transformed into the
policy preferences of the Members of this Court.” 521 U. S.,
at 720 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
On occasion, when the Court has ignored the “[a]ppropriate limits” imposed by “‘respect for the teachings of history,’” Moore, 431 U. S., at 503 (plurality opinion), it has
fallen into the freewheeling judicial policymaking that
characterized discredited decisions such as Lochner v. New
York, 198 U. S. 45 (1905). The Court must not fall prey to
such an unprincipled approach. Instead, guided by the history and tradition that map the essential components of our
Nation’s concept of ordered liberty, we must ask what the
Fourteenth Amendment means by the term “liberty.” When
we engage in that inquiry in the present case, the clear answer is that the Fourteenth Amendment does not protect
—————— 21Four Essays on Liberty 121 (1969).


Cite as: 597 U. S. ____ (2022) 15
Opinion of the Court
the right to an abortion.22
B
1
Until the latter part of the 20th century, there was no
support in American law for a constitutional right to obtain
an abortion. No state constitutional provision had recognized such a right. Until a few years before Roe was handed
down, no federal or state court had recognized such a right.
Nor had any scholarly treatise of which we are aware. And
although law review articles are not reticent about advocating new rights, the earliest article proposing a constitutional right to abortion that has come to our attention was
published only a few years before Roe.23
—————— 22That is true regardless of whether we look to the Amendment’s Due
Process Clause or its Privileges or Immunities Clause. Some scholars
and Justices have maintained that the Privileges or Immunities Clause
is the provision of the Fourteenth Amendment that guarantees substantive rights. See, e.g., McDonald v. Chicago, 561 U. S. 742, 813–850
(2010) (THOMAS, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment); Duncan, 391 U. S., at 165–166 (Black, J., concurring); A. Amar, Bill of Rights:
Creation and Reconstruction 163–180 (1998) (Amar); J. Ely, Democracy
and Distrust 22–30 (1980); 2 W. Crosskey, Politics and the Constitution
in the History of the United States 1089–1095 (1953). But even on that
view, such a right would need to be rooted in the Nation’s history and
tradition. See Corfield v. Coryell, 6 F. Cas. 546, 551–552 (No. 3,230) (CC
ED Pa. 1823) (describing unenumerated rights under the Privileges and
Immunities Clause, Art. IV, §2, as those “fundamental” rights “which
have, at all times, been enjoyed by the citizens of the several states”);
Amar 176 (relying on Corfield to interpret the Privileges or Immunities
Clause); cf. McDonald, 561 U. S., at 819–820, 832, 854 (opinion of
THOMAS, J.) (reserving the question whether the Privileges or Immunities Clause protects “any rights besides those enumerated in the Constitution”). 23See R. Lucas, Federal Constitutional Limitations on the Enforcement and Administration of State Abortion Statutes, 46 N. C. L. Rev. 730
(1968) (Lucas); see also D. Garrow, Liberty and Sexuality 334–335 (1994)
(Garrow) (stating that Lucas was “undeniably the first person to fully